CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to PulumiCost Core

Thank you for your interest in contributing to PulumiCost Core! This document
provides guidelines and instructions for contributing code, documentation, and
feedback.

## Table of Contents

- [License](#license)
- [Contribution Types](#contribution-types)
- [Development Environment Setup](#development-environment-setup)
- [Feature Development with SpecKit](#feature-development-with-speckit)
- [Minor Bug Fixes](#minor-bug-fixes)
- [Quality Requirements](#quality-requirements)
- [Submitting Changes](#submitting-changes)
- [Issue Labels and Decision Tracking](#issue-labels-and-decision-tracking)
- [Getting Help](#getting-help)

## License

This project is licensed under the **Apache License 2.0**.

By contributing to PulumiCost Core, you agree that your contributions will be
licensed under the same terms. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for the full
license text.

## Contribution Types

### New Features (Requires SpecKit)

New features, capabilities, and architectural changes **must** use
[SpecKit](https://github.com/github/spec-kit) for specification-driven
development. This ensures features are well-planned, documented, and testable.

### Minor Bug Fixes (SpecKit Optional)

Minor bug fixes and small improvements **do not require** SpecKit. You may
submit a pull request directly.

**What qualifies as a minor bug fix:**

- Typo corrections in code or documentation
- Small logic fixes that don't change APIs
- Documentation corrections or clarifications
- Dependency updates for security patches
- Test improvements and additional test coverage
- Performance optimizations without API changes

**What requires SpecKit:**

- New CLI commands or flags
- New features or capabilities
- API changes or new endpoints
- Architectural modifications
- Changes affecting the plugin protocol
- New integrations or data sources

## Development Environment Setup

### Prerequisites

| Tool             | Version    | Purpose             |
| ---------------- | ---------- | ------------------- |
| Go               | 1.25.5+    | Core development    |
| golangci-lint    | v2.6.2     | Go linting          |
| markdownlint-cli | v0.45.0    | Markdown linting    |
| Git              | Latest     | Version control     |
| Make             | Latest     | Build automation    |
| Node.js          | Latest LTS | Documentation tools |

### Installing Development Tools

**Install Go** (if not already installed):

Download from [go.dev/dl](https://go.dev/dl/)

**Install golangci-lint:**

```bash
# Download and install golangci-lint
LINT_URL="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/golangci/golangci-lint"
curl -sSfL "${LINT_URL}/HEAD/install.sh" | sh -s -- -b "$HOME/go/bin" v2.6.2
```

**Install markdownlint-cli:**

```bash
npm install -g markdownlint-cli@0.45.0
```

### Clone and Build

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-core.git
cd pulumicost-core

# Download dependencies
go mod download

# Build the binary
make build

# Verify the build
./bin/pulumicost --help
```

### Make Targets Reference

Run `make help` for a complete list. All available targets:

#### Core Development Targets

| Target           | Description                                         |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| `make build`     | Build the `pulumicost` binary to `bin/pulumicost`   |
| `make test`      | Run all unit tests                                  |
| `make test-race` | Run tests with Go race detector enabled             |
| `make lint`      | Run Go linters (golangci-lint) and Markdown linters |
| `make validate`  | Run `go mod tidy`, `go vet`, and format validation  |
| `make clean`     | Remove build artifacts (`bin/` directory)           |
| `make run`       | Build and run binary with `--help` flag             |
| `make dev`       | Build and run binary without arguments              |
| `make inspect`   | Launch MCP Inspector for interactive testing        |

#### Documentation Targets

| Target               | Description                                       |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `make docs-lint`     | Lint documentation markdown files                 |
| `make docs-build`    | Build documentation site with Jekyll              |
| `make docs-serve`    | Serve documentation locally (localhost:4000)      |
| `make docs-validate` | Validate documentation structure and completeness |

### Verifying Your Setup

```bash
# All of these should pass before you begin development
make build      # Should complete without errors
make test       # All tests should pass
make lint       # No linting errors
make validate   # Module and vet checks pass
```

## Feature Development with SpecKit

New features **must** follow specification-driven development using
[SpecKit](https://github.com/github/spec-kit). This workflow ensures features
are properly designed before implementation.

### Why SpecKit?

- **Better planning**: Features are fully specified before coding begins
- **Clearer requirements**: User stories and acceptance criteria defined upfront
- **Consistent quality**: Follows project constitution and quality gates
- **Easier review**: Reviewers understand the intent and scope

### Installing SpecKit

```bash
# Install with uv (recommended)
uv tool install specify-cli --from git+https://github.com/github/spec-kit.git

# Or install with pipx
pipx install git+https://github.com/github/spec-kit.git
```

### SpecKit Workflow

1. **Create specification** - Define what you're building:

   ```text
   /speckit.specify [your feature description]
   ```

2. **Clarify ambiguities** - Resolve underspecified areas (recommended):

   ```text
   /speckit.clarify
   ```

   This asks targeted questions to fill gaps in your spec before planning.

3. **Plan implementation** - Design the technical approach:

   ```text
   /speckit.plan
   ```

4. **Generate tasks** - Break down into actionable items:

   ```text
   /speckit.tasks
   ```

5. **Analyze consistency** - Validate artifacts before implementation:

   ```text
   /speckit.analyze
   ```

   This performs read-only analysis across spec, plan, and tasks to catch
   inconsistencies, gaps, and constitution violations.

6. **Implement** - Build the feature:

   ```text
   /speckit.implement
   ```

### Project Specifications Directory

All specifications, plans, and templates are stored in the `.specify/` directory:

```text
.specify/
├── memory/
│   └── constitution.md    # Project principles and quality gates
├── scripts/               # Helper scripts for SpecKit workflows
│   └── bash/
│       ├── check-prerequisites.sh
│       ├── create-new-feature.sh
│       └── setup-plan.sh
└── templates/             # Templates for specs, plans, tasks
    ├── spec-template.md
    ├── plan-template.md
    ├── tasks-template.md
    └── checklist-template.md
```

**Important**: Review [.specify/memory/constitution.md](.specify/memory/constitution.md)
before starting any feature work. It defines the core principles and quality
gates that all contributions must follow.

## Minor Bug Fixes

For minor bug fixes that don't require SpecKit:

1. **Create a branch:**

   ```bash
   git checkout -b fix/brief-description main
   ```

2. **Make your changes** and write tests

3. **Run quality checks:**

   ```bash
   make test    # Must pass
   make lint    # Must pass
   ```

4. **Submit a pull request** with:
   - Clear description of the bug
   - Explanation of the fix
   - Tests demonstrating the fix works

## Quality Requirements

All contributions must meet these quality gates, which are enforced by CI:

### Code Quality

- **Test Coverage**: Minimum 80% overall, 95% for critical paths
- **Linting**: `golangci-lint` must pass with zero errors
- **Security**: `govulncheck` must report no high/critical vulnerabilities
- **Formatting**: All Go code must be formatted with `gofmt`
- **Documentation**: Minimum 80% docstring coverage for exported symbols

### Pre-Submission Checklist

**Always run these commands before submitting:**

```bash
make lint      # Must pass with no errors
make test      # All tests must pass
make validate  # Module and vet checks must pass
```

### Test Requirements

For detailed testing instructions, see the [Testing Guide](docs/testing/guide.md).

- Write tests before implementation (TDD approach)
- Include tests for all new code paths
- Test error conditions and edge cases
- Use table-driven tests where appropriate
- Run tests with race detector: `make test-race`

### Running Fuzz Tests

PulumiCost uses Go's native fuzzing (Go 1.25+) to test parser resilience:

```bash
# Run JSON parser fuzz test (30 seconds)
go test -fuzz=FuzzJSON$ -fuzztime=30s ./internal/ingest

# Run YAML parser fuzz test (30 seconds)
go test -fuzz=FuzzYAML$ -fuzztime=30s ./internal/spec

# Run all fuzz tests in a package
go test -fuzz=. -fuzztime=30s ./internal/ingest
```

**Fuzz test locations:**

| Package           | Test Function        | Target               |
| ----------------- | -------------------- | -------------------- |
| `internal/ingest` | `FuzzJSON`           | JSON parser          |
| `internal/ingest` | `FuzzPulumiPlanParse`| Full plan parsing    |
| `internal/spec`   | `FuzzYAML`           | YAML spec parsing    |
| `internal/spec`   | `FuzzSpecFilename`   | Spec filename parser |

**Seed corpus:**

Fuzz tests use seed corpora in `testdata/fuzz/` directories. Add new
interesting inputs discovered during fuzzing to these directories.

**CI integration:**

- PRs run 30-second fuzz smoke tests
- Nightly builds run 6-hour deep fuzzing sessions

### Running Benchmarks

PulumiCost includes performance benchmarks for scalability testing:

```bash
# Run all benchmarks
go test -bench=. -benchmem ./test/benchmarks/...

# Run specific scale benchmarks
go test -bench=BenchmarkScale -benchmem ./test/benchmarks/...

# Run with specific iteration count
go test -bench=BenchmarkScale1K -benchtime=10x -benchmem ./test/benchmarks/...
```

**Available benchmarks:**

| Benchmark                    | Description             | Target    |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------- | --------- |
| `BenchmarkScale1K`           | 1,000 resources         | < 1s      |
| `BenchmarkScale10K`          | 10,000 resources        | < 30s     |
| `BenchmarkScale100K`         | 100,000 resources       | < 5min    |
| `BenchmarkDeeplyNested`      | Deep nesting complexity | < 1s      |
| `BenchmarkJSONParsing`       | JSON parsing at scale   | Baseline  |
| `BenchmarkGeneratorOverhead` | Generator overhead      | Baseline  |

**Benchmark guidelines:**

- Run benchmarks on a quiet system for consistent results
- Use `-benchtime=10x` for quick checks, `-benchtime=1m` for accurate results
- Compare results between commits to detect performance regressions
- CI runs smoke benchmarks (1x) on every PR

### Commit Message Format

Follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/):

```text
type(scope): description

[optional body]

[optional footer]
```

**Types:** `feat`, `fix`, `docs`, `test`, `refactor`, `perf`, `chore`

**Examples:**

```text
feat(cli): add --format flag for cost output
fix(engine): correct monthly cost calculation rounding
docs(contributing): add SpecKit workflow documentation
test(registry): add plugin discovery edge case tests
```

## Submitting Changes

### Pull Request Process

1. **Ensure your branch is current:**

   ```bash
   git fetch origin
   git rebase origin/main
   ```

2. **Run all quality checks:**

   ```bash
   make test
   make lint
   make validate
   ```

3. **Push and create PR:**

   ```bash
   git push origin your-branch-name
   ```

4. **Fill in PR template** with:
   - Description of changes
   - Type of change (feature, fix, docs, etc.)
   - Testing performed
   - Related issues

### CI Checks

All pull requests must pass:

- Go Tests with race detection
- Code Coverage (minimum threshold)
- golangci-lint
- Security scanning (govulncheck)
- Documentation validation
- Cross-platform builds (Linux, macOS, Windows)

### Automated Nightly Failure Analysis

To assist with debugging, the project employs an automated nightly failure
analysis workflow:

- **Trigger**: When a nightly build fails, an issue is created with the
  `nightly-failure` label.
- **Analysis**: A workflow automatically runs to fetch logs, analyze them
  using OpenCode, and post a triage report as a comment.
- **Goal**: Provide immediate root cause hypothesis and suggested fixes to
  reduce manual investigation time.

## Project Architecture

PulumiCost operates as a three-repository ecosystem:

| Repository                  | Purpose                                     |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| [pulumicost-core][core]     | CLI tool, plugin host, orchestration engine |
| [pulumicost-spec][spec]     | Protocol buffer definitions, SDK generation |
| [pulumicost-plugin][plugin] | Plugin implementations (Kubecost, Vantage)  |

[core]: https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-core
[spec]: https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-spec
[plugin]: https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin

Cross-repository changes require coordination. See the
[constitution](.specify/memory/constitution.md) for the cross-repo change
protocol.

## Issue Labels and Decision Tracking

### The `decision` Label

Issues labeled with `decision` represent **deliberate architectural or product
decisions** with documented reasoning. These serve as lightweight Architecture
Decision Records (ADRs) without the overhead of separate markdown files.

**When to use `decision`:**

- Thorough analysis was performed
- Reasoning is documented in the issue body
- A deliberate choice was made (implement, defer, or reject)

**Finding past decisions:**

```bash
# Search all documented decisions
gh issue list --repo rshade/pulumicost-core --state closed --label decision

# Or via GitHub UI
# Issues → Closed → Filter by "decision" label
```

**Why this matters:**

- Prevents re-litigating the same issues
- New contributors can understand *why* things are the way they are
- Creates searchable institutional knowledge

### Standard Labels

| Label              | Purpose                                   |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------------------- |
| `decision`         | Deliberate architectural/product decision |
| `enhancement`      | New feature or request                    |
| `bug`              | Something isn't working                   |
| `documentation`    | Documentation improvements                |
| `good first issue` | Good for newcomers                        |

## Getting Help

### Documentation

- [Developer Guide](docs/guides/developer-guide.md) - Complete developer docs
- [Architecture](docs/architecture/) - System design and diagrams
- [Plugin Development](docs/plugins/plugin-development.md) - Building plugins

### Support Channels

- **GitHub Issues**: Bug reports and feature requests
- **GitHub Discussions**: Questions and community discussion

## Code of Conduct

Be respectful and constructive in all interactions. We welcome contributors of
all experience levels and backgrounds.

---

Thank you for contributing to PulumiCost Core!

Commit message:

chore(all): rebrand ecosystem to finfocus
- Renamed Go module from pulumicost-core to finfocus across all files
- Updated environment variable prefix from PULUMICOST to FINFOCUS
- Implemented a migration layer for legacy home config directory
- Restored Pulumicost backward compatibility for env vars and binaries
- Updated Docker images, Goreleaser, and CI/CD workflows for new name
- Performed comprehensive documentation rebranding in docs/ and README

- [x] Verified all imports correctly point to github.com/rshade/finfocus
- [x] Tested legacy compatibility layer for PULUMICOST variables
- [x] Confirmed binary builds as finfocus and pulumi-tool-finfocus
- [x] make lint passes with zero issues
- [x] make test passes (excluding AWS-dependent E2E)

- internal/migration/migrator.go - Logic for migrating config/state
- cmd/finfocus/root_test.go - Tests for branded CLI output

- go.mod - Renamed module path
- internal/config/config.go - Updated env prefix and added compat layer
- internal/registry/registry.go - Updated plugin discovery for legacy names
- README.md - Full rebranding and updated project links

- Renamed cmd/pulumicost directory to cmd/finfocus
- Updated agent configuration files (.claude, .gemini)

Closes #113

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to FinFocus Core

Thank you for your interest in contributing to FinFocus Core! This document
provides guidelines and instructions for contributing code, documentation, and
feedback.

## Table of Contents

- [License](#license)
- [Contribution Types](#contribution-types)
- [Development Environment Setup](#development-environment-setup)
- [Feature Development with SpecKit](#feature-development-with-speckit)
- [Minor Bug Fixes](#minor-bug-fixes)
- [Quality Requirements](#quality-requirements)
- [Submitting Changes](#submitting-changes)
- [Issue Labels and Decision Tracking](#issue-labels-and-decision-tracking)
- [Getting Help](#getting-help)

## License

This project is licensed under the **Apache License 2.0**.

By contributing to FinFocus Core, you agree that your contributions will be
licensed under the same terms. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for the full
license text.

## Contribution Types

### New Features (Requires SpecKit)

New features, capabilities, and architectural changes **must** use
[SpecKit](https://github.com/github/spec-kit) for specification-driven
development. This ensures features are well-planned, documented, and testable.

### Minor Bug Fixes (SpecKit Optional)

Minor bug fixes and small improvements **do not require** SpecKit. You may
submit a pull request directly.

**What qualifies as a minor bug fix:**

- Typo corrections in code or documentation
- Small logic fixes that don't change APIs
- Documentation corrections or clarifications
- Dependency updates for security patches
- Test improvements and additional test coverage
- Performance optimizations without API changes

**What requires SpecKit:**

- New CLI commands or flags
- New features or capabilities
- API changes or new endpoints
- Architectural modifications
- Changes affecting the plugin protocol
- New integrations or data sources

## Development Environment Setup

### Prerequisites

| Tool             | Version    | Purpose             |
| ---------------- | ---------- | ------------------- |
| Go               | 1.25.5+    | Core development    |
| golangci-lint    | v2.6.2     | Go linting          |
| markdownlint-cli | v0.45.0    | Markdown linting    |
| Git              | Latest     | Version control     |
| Make             | Latest     | Build automation    |
| Node.js          | Latest LTS | Documentation tools |

### Installing Development Tools

**Install Go** (if not already installed):

Download from [go.dev/dl](https://go.dev/dl/)

**Install golangci-lint:**

```bash
# Download and install golangci-lint
LINT_URL="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/golangci/golangci-lint"
curl -sSfL "${LINT_URL}/HEAD/install.sh" | sh -s -- -b "$HOME/go/bin" v2.6.2
```

**Install markdownlint-cli:**

```bash
npm install -g markdownlint-cli@0.45.0
```

### Clone and Build

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/rshade/finfocus.git
cd finfocus

# Download dependencies
go mod download

# Build the binary
make build

# Verify the build
./bin/finfocus --help
```

### Make Targets Reference

Run `make help` for a complete list. All available targets:

#### Core Development Targets

| Target           | Description                                         |
| ---------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| `make build`     | Build the `finfocus` binary to `bin/finfocus`   |
| `make test`      | Run all unit tests                                  |
| `make test-race` | Run tests with Go race detector enabled             |
| `make lint`      | Run Go linters (golangci-lint) and Markdown linters |
| `make validate`  | Run `go mod tidy`, `go vet`, and format validation  |
| `make clean`     | Remove build artifacts (`bin/` directory)           |
| `make run`       | Build and run binary with `--help` flag             |
| `make dev`       | Build and run binary without arguments              |
| `make inspect`   | Launch MCP Inspector for interactive testing        |

#### Documentation Targets

| Target               | Description                                       |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `make docs-lint`     | Lint documentation markdown files                 |
| `make docs-build`    | Build documentation site with Jekyll              |
| `make docs-serve`    | Serve documentation locally (localhost:4000)      |
| `make docs-validate` | Validate documentation structure and completeness |

### Verifying Your Setup

```bash
# All of these should pass before you begin development
make build      # Should complete without errors
make test       # All tests should pass
make lint       # No linting errors
make validate   # Module and vet checks pass
```

## Feature Development with SpecKit

New features **must** follow specification-driven development using
[SpecKit](https://github.com/github/spec-kit). This workflow ensures features
are properly designed before implementation.

### Why SpecKit?

- **Better planning**: Features are fully specified before coding begins
- **Clearer requirements**: User stories and acceptance criteria defined upfront
- **Consistent quality**: Follows project constitution and quality gates
- **Easier review**: Reviewers understand the intent and scope

### Installing SpecKit

```bash
# Install with uv (recommended)
uv tool install specify-cli --from git+https://github.com/github/spec-kit.git

# Or install with pipx
pipx install git+https://github.com/github/spec-kit.git
```

### SpecKit Workflow

1. **Create specification** - Define what you're building:

   ```text
   /speckit.specify [your feature description]
   ```

2. **Clarify ambiguities** - Resolve underspecified areas (recommended):

   ```text
   /speckit.clarify
   ```

   This asks targeted questions to fill gaps in your spec before planning.

3. **Plan implementation** - Design the technical approach:

   ```text
   /speckit.plan
   ```

4. **Generate tasks** - Break down into actionable items:

   ```text
   /speckit.tasks
   ```

5. **Analyze consistency** - Validate artifacts before implementation:

   ```text
   /speckit.analyze
   ```

   This performs read-only analysis across spec, plan, and tasks to catch
   inconsistencies, gaps, and constitution violations.

6. **Implement** - Build the feature:

   ```text
   /speckit.implement
   ```

### Project Specifications Directory

All specifications, plans, and templates are stored in the `.specify/` directory:

```text
.specify/
├── memory/
│   └── constitution.md    # Project principles and quality gates
├── scripts/               # Helper scripts for SpecKit workflows
│   └── bash/
│       ├── check-prerequisites.sh
│       ├── create-new-feature.sh
│       └── setup-plan.sh
└── templates/             # Templates for specs, plans, tasks
    ├── spec-template.md
    ├── plan-template.md
    ├── tasks-template.md
    └── checklist-template.md
```

**Important**: Review [.specify/memory/constitution.md](.specify/memory/constitution.md)
before starting any feature work. It defines the core principles and quality
gates that all contributions must follow.

## Minor Bug Fixes

For minor bug fixes that don't require SpecKit:

1. **Create a branch:**

   ```bash
   git checkout -b fix/brief-description main
   ```

2. **Make your changes** and write tests

3. **Run quality checks:**

   ```bash
   make test    # Must pass
   make lint    # Must pass
   ```

4. **Submit a pull request** with:
   - Clear description of the bug
   - Explanation of the fix
   - Tests demonstrating the fix works

## Quality Requirements

All contributions must meet these quality gates, which are enforced by CI:

### Code Quality

- **Test Coverage**: Minimum 80% overall, 95% for critical paths
- **Linting**: `golangci-lint` must pass with zero errors
- **Security**: `govulncheck` must report no high/critical vulnerabilities
- **Formatting**: All Go code must be formatted with `gofmt`
- **Documentation**: Minimum 80% docstring coverage for exported symbols

### Pre-Submission Checklist

**Always run these commands before submitting:**

```bash
make lint      # Must pass with no errors
make test      # All tests must pass
make validate  # Module and vet checks must pass
```

### Test Requirements

For detailed testing instructions, see the [Testing Guide](docs/testing/guide.md).

- Write tests before implementation (TDD approach)
- Include tests for all new code paths
- Test error conditions and edge cases
- Use table-driven tests where appropriate
- Run tests with race detector: `make test-race`

### Running Fuzz Tests

FinFocus uses Go's native fuzzing (Go 1.25+) to test parser resilience:

```bash
# Run JSON parser fuzz test (30 seconds)
go test -fuzz=FuzzJSON$ -fuzztime=30s ./internal/ingest

# Run YAML parser fuzz test (30 seconds)
go test -fuzz=FuzzYAML$ -fuzztime=30s ./internal/spec

# Run all fuzz tests in a package
go test -fuzz=. -fuzztime=30s ./internal/ingest
```

**Fuzz test locations:**

| Package           | Test Function        | Target               |
| ----------------- | -------------------- | -------------------- |
| `internal/ingest` | `FuzzJSON`           | JSON parser          |
| `internal/ingest` | `FuzzPulumiPlanParse`| Full plan parsing    |
| `internal/spec`   | `FuzzYAML`           | YAML spec parsing    |
| `internal/spec`   | `FuzzSpecFilename`   | Spec filename parser |

**Seed corpus:**

Fuzz tests use seed corpora in `testdata/fuzz/` directories. Add new
interesting inputs discovered during fuzzing to these directories.

**CI integration:**

- PRs run 30-second fuzz smoke tests
- Nightly builds run 6-hour deep fuzzing sessions

### Running Benchmarks

FinFocus includes performance benchmarks for scalability testing:

```bash
# Run all benchmarks
go test -bench=. -benchmem ./test/benchmarks/...

# Run specific scale benchmarks
go test -bench=BenchmarkScale -benchmem ./test/benchmarks/...

# Run with specific iteration count
go test -bench=BenchmarkScale1K -benchtime=10x -benchmem ./test/benchmarks/...
```

**Available benchmarks:**

| Benchmark                    | Description             | Target    |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------- | --------- |
| `BenchmarkScale1K`           | 1,000 resources         | < 1s      |
| `BenchmarkScale10K`          | 10,000 resources        | < 30s     |
| `BenchmarkScale100K`         | 100,000 resources       | < 5min    |
| `BenchmarkDeeplyNested`      | Deep nesting complexity | < 1s      |
| `BenchmarkJSONParsing`       | JSON parsing at scale   | Baseline  |
| `BenchmarkGeneratorOverhead` | Generator overhead      | Baseline  |

**Benchmark guidelines:**

- Run benchmarks on a quiet system for consistent results
- Use `-benchtime=10x` for quick checks, `-benchtime=1m` for accurate results
- Compare results between commits to detect performance regressions
- CI runs smoke benchmarks (1x) on every PR

### Commit Message Format

Follow [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/):

```text
type(scope): description

[optional body]

[optional footer]
```

**Types:** `feat`, `fix`, `docs`, `test`, `refactor`, `perf`, `chore`

**Examples:**

```text
feat(cli): add --format flag for cost output
fix(engine): correct monthly cost calculation rounding
docs(contributing): add SpecKit workflow documentation
test(registry): add plugin discovery edge case tests
```

## Submitting Changes

### Pull Request Process

1. **Ensure your branch is current:**

   ```bash
   git fetch origin
   git rebase origin/main
   ```

2. **Run all quality checks:**

   ```bash
   make test
   make lint
   make validate
   ```

3. **Push and create PR:**

   ```bash
   git push origin your-branch-name
   ```

4. **Fill in PR template** with:
   - Description of changes
   - Type of change (feature, fix, docs, etc.)
   - Testing performed
   - Related issues

### CI Checks

All pull requests must pass:

- Go Tests with race detection
- Code Coverage (minimum threshold)
- golangci-lint
- Security scanning (govulncheck)
- Documentation validation
- Cross-platform builds (Linux, macOS, Windows)

### Automated Nightly Failure Analysis

To assist with debugging, the project employs an automated nightly failure
analysis workflow:

- **Trigger**: When a nightly build fails, an issue is created with the
  `nightly-failure` label.
- **Analysis**: A workflow automatically runs to fetch logs, analyze them
  using OpenCode, and post a triage report as a comment.
- **Goal**: Provide immediate root cause hypothesis and suggested fixes to
  reduce manual investigation time.

## Project Architecture

FinFocus operates as a three-repository ecosystem:

| Repository                  | Purpose                                     |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| [finfocus][core]     | CLI tool, plugin host, orchestration engine |
| [finfocus-spec][spec]     | Protocol buffer definitions, SDK generation |
| [finfocus-plugin][plugin] | Plugin implementations (Kubecost, Vantage)  |

[core]: https://github.com/rshade/finfocus
[spec]: https://github.com/rshade/finfocus-spec
[plugin]: https://github.com/rshade/finfocus-plugin

Cross-repository changes require coordination. See the
[constitution](.specify/memory/constitution.md) for the cross-repo change
protocol.

## Issue Labels and Decision Tracking

### The `decision` Label

Issues labeled with `decision` represent **deliberate architectural or product
decisions** with documented reasoning. These serve as lightweight Architecture
Decision Records (ADRs) without the overhead of separate markdown files.

**When to use `decision`:**

- Thorough analysis was performed
- Reasoning is documented in the issue body
- A deliberate choice was made (implement, defer, or reject)

**Finding past decisions:**

```bash
# Search all documented decisions
gh issue list --repo rshade/finfocus --state closed --label decision

# Or via GitHub UI
# Issues → Closed → Filter by "decision" label
```

**Why this matters:**

- Prevents re-litigating the same issues
- New contributors can understand *why* things are the way they are
- Creates searchable institutional knowledge

### Standard Labels

| Label              | Purpose                                   |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------------------- |
| `decision`         | Deliberate architectural/product decision |
| `enhancement`      | New feature or request                    |
| `bug`              | Something isn't working                   |
| `documentation`    | Documentation improvements                |
| `good first issue` | Good for newcomers                        |

## Getting Help

### Documentation

- [Developer Guide](docs/guides/developer-guide.md) - Complete developer docs
- [Architecture](docs/architecture/) - System design and diagrams
- [Plugin Development](docs/plugins/plugin-development.md) - Building plugins

### Support Channels

- **GitHub Issues**: Bug reports and feature requests
- **GitHub Discussions**: Questions and community discussion

## Code of Conduct

Be respectful and constructive in all interactions. We welcome contributors of
all experience levels and backgrounds.

---

Thank you for contributing to FinFocus Core!
