docs/deployment/security.md, before:

---
title: Security
layout: default
---

PulumiCost is designed with security in mind, especially when handling sensitive cloud credentials
and cost data.

## Credential Handling

PulumiCost does **not** store cloud provider credentials. It relies on the environment's configuration
(e.g., `AWS_PROFILE`, `AZURE_CREDENTIALS`) or the credentials provided to the Pulumi engine.

- **Recommendation**: Use short-lived credentials (OIDC) in CI/CD environments.
- **Plugins**: Plugins run as separate processes and inherit the environment variables of the host
  process. Ensure strict control over the environment where PulumiCost runs.

## Data Privacy

PulumiCost processes cost data locally or within your CI runner.

- **No SaaS Dependency**: The core engine does not send data to any external SaaS platform unless
  you configure a specific plugin (like Vantage) to do so.
- **Local Specs**: By default, pricing data is fetched from public APIs or local spec files.

## Plugin Security

Plugins are executable binaries.

- **Source Verification**: Only install plugins from trusted sources (e.g., the official `rshade`
  organization).
- **Checksums**: Future versions will enforce checksum verification for plugins.

## Container Security

Our Docker images are built using minimal base images (Alpine) and run as non-root users.

- See [Docker Guide](docker.md) for more details.

## Reporting Vulnerabilities

If you discover a security vulnerability, please do not report it via GitHub Issues. Instead, use
the [GitHub Security Advisory](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-core/security/advisories)
workflow or follow the instructions in the repository's security policy.

Commit message:

chore(all): rebrand ecosystem to finfocus
- Renamed Go module from pulumicost-core to finfocus across all files
- Updated environment variable prefix from PULUMICOST to FINFOCUS
- Implemented a migration layer for legacy home config directory
- Restored Pulumicost backward compatibility for env vars and binaries
- Updated Docker images, Goreleaser, and CI/CD workflows for new name
- Performed comprehensive documentation rebranding in docs/ and README

- [x] Verified all imports correctly point to github.com/rshade/finfocus
- [x] Tested legacy compatibility layer for PULUMICOST variables
- [x] Confirmed binary builds as finfocus and pulumi-tool-finfocus
- [x] make lint passes with zero issues
- [x] make test passes (excluding AWS-dependent E2E)

- internal/migration/migrator.go - Logic for migrating config/state
- cmd/finfocus/root_test.go - Tests for branded CLI output

- go.mod - Renamed module path
- internal/config/config.go - Updated env prefix and added compat layer
- internal/registry/registry.go - Updated plugin discovery for legacy names
- README.md - Full rebranding and updated project links

- Renamed cmd/pulumicost directory to cmd/finfocus
- Updated agent configuration files (.claude, .gemini)

Closes #113

docs/deployment/security.md, after:

---
title: Security
layout: default
---

FinFocus is designed with security in mind, especially when handling sensitive cloud credentials
and cost data.

## Credential Handling

FinFocus does **not** store cloud provider credentials. It relies on the environment's configuration
(e.g., `AWS_PROFILE`, `AZURE_CREDENTIALS`) or the credentials provided to the Pulumi engine.

- **Recommendation**: Use short-lived credentials (OIDC) in CI/CD environments.
- **Plugins**: Plugins run as separate processes and inherit the environment variables of the host
  process. Ensure strict control over the environment where FinFocus runs.

## Data Privacy

FinFocus processes cost data locally or within your CI runner.

- **No SaaS Dependency**: The core engine does not send data to any external SaaS platform unless
  you configure a specific plugin (like Vantage) to do so.
- **Local Specs**: By default, pricing data is fetched from public APIs or local spec files.

## Plugin Security

Plugins are executable binaries.

- **Source Verification**: Only install plugins from trusted sources (e.g., the official `rshade`
  organization).
- **Checksums**: Future versions will enforce checksum verification for plugins.

## Container Security

Our Docker images are built using minimal base images (Alpine) and run as non-root users.

- See [Docker Guide](docker.md) for more details.

## Reporting Vulnerabilities

If you discover a security vulnerability, please do not report it via GitHub Issues. Instead, use
the [GitHub Security Advisory](https://github.com/rshade/finfocus/security/advisories)
workflow or follow the instructions in the repository's security policy.
