specs/010-sync-docs-codebase/quickstart.md, before:

# Quickstart: Analyzer Setup

## Zero-Click Cost Estimation

PulumiCost integrates directly with the Pulumi CLI as an analyzer, providing cost estimates automatically during `pulumi preview`.

### Prerequisites

- Pulumi CLI installed
- `pulumicost` installed and in your PATH

### Configuration

Add the analyzer to your project's `Pulumi.yaml`:

```yaml
name: my-project
runtime: go
description: A Go Pulumi program
plugins:
  - path: pulumicost
    args: ["analyzer", "serve"]
```

### Usage

Run a preview as normal. Cost estimates will appear in the diagnostics output:

```bash
pulumi preview
```

**Example Output:**

```text
Diagnostics:
  pulumicost:
    Type: aws:ec2/instance:Instance
    ID:   web-server
    Cost: $7.59/month (est.)
```

### Troubleshooting

If you don't see cost estimates:

1. **Check Logs**: Run with debug logging enabled:
   ```bash
   PULUMICOST_LOG_LEVEL=debug pulumi preview
   ```
   Check `~/.pulumicost/logs/pulumicost.log`.

2. **Verify Port**: The analyzer runs on a dynamic port. Ensure no firewalls are blocking localhost traffic.

3. **Strict Mode**: If config issues are suspected, enable strict mode:
   ```bash
   PULUMICOST_CONFIG_STRICT=true pulumi preview
   ```

Commit message:

chore(all): rebrand ecosystem to finfocus
- Renamed Go module from pulumicost-core to finfocus across all files
- Updated environment variable prefix from PULUMICOST to FINFOCUS
- Implemented a migration layer for legacy home config directory
- Restored Pulumicost backward compatibility for env vars and binaries
- Updated Docker images, Goreleaser, and CI/CD workflows for new name
- Performed comprehensive documentation rebranding in docs/ and README

- [x] Verified all imports correctly point to github.com/rshade/finfocus
- [x] Tested legacy compatibility layer for PULUMICOST variables
- [x] Confirmed binary builds as finfocus and pulumi-tool-finfocus
- [x] make lint passes with zero issues
- [x] make test passes (excluding AWS-dependent E2E)

- internal/migration/migrator.go - Logic for migrating config/state
- cmd/finfocus/root_test.go - Tests for branded CLI output

- go.mod - Renamed module path
- internal/config/config.go - Updated env prefix and added compat layer
- internal/registry/registry.go - Updated plugin discovery for legacy names
- README.md - Full rebranding and updated project links

- Renamed cmd/pulumicost directory to cmd/finfocus
- Updated agent configuration files (.claude, .gemini)

Closes #113

specs/010-sync-docs-codebase/quickstart.md, after:

# Quickstart: Analyzer Setup

## Zero-Click Cost Estimation

FinFocus integrates directly with the Pulumi CLI as an analyzer, providing cost estimates automatically during `pulumi preview`.

### Prerequisites

- Pulumi CLI installed
- `finfocus` installed and in your PATH

### Configuration

Add the analyzer to your project's `Pulumi.yaml`:

```yaml
name: my-project
runtime: go
description: A Go Pulumi program
plugins:
  - path: finfocus
    args: ["analyzer", "serve"]
```

### Usage

Run a preview as normal. Cost estimates will appear in the diagnostics output:

```bash
pulumi preview
```

**Example Output:**

```text
Diagnostics:
  finfocus:
    Type: aws:ec2/instance:Instance
    ID:   web-server
    Cost: $7.59/month (est.)
```

### Troubleshooting

If you don't see cost estimates:

1. **Check Logs**: Run with debug logging enabled:
   ```bash
   FINFOCUS_LOG_LEVEL=debug pulumi preview
   ```
   Check `~/.finfocus/logs/finfocus.log`.

2. **Verify Port**: The analyzer runs on a dynamic port. Ensure no firewalls are blocking localhost traffic.

3. **Strict Mode**: If config issues are suspected, enable strict mode:
   ```bash
   FINFOCUS_CONFIG_STRICT=true pulumi preview
   ```
