docs/architecture/analyzer.md, before:

---
title: Analyzer Architecture
description: Architecture of the Pulumicost Analyzer integration
layout: default
---

Pulumicost integrates with the Pulumi engine via the Analyzer interface.
This allows Pulumicost to intercept resource changes during `pulumi preview`
and `pulumi up` to provide cost estimates and policy enforcement.

## Overview

The Analyzer runs as a gRPC service that Pulumi connects to. When you run
a Pulumi command, if the analyzer is configured, Pulumi sends resource
definitions to Pulumicost.

## Protocol

Pulumicost implements the `pulumirpc.Analyzer` service.

- **Analyze**: Receives a resource and its properties. Pulumicost calculates
  the cost.
- **AnalyzeStack**: Receives the entire stack state.

## Configuration

The analyzer is configured via `Pulumi.yaml` using the `analyzers` key:

```yaml
analyzers:
  - name: pulumicost
    version: v1.0.0
```

## Diagnostics

If a resource violates a cost policy (e.g., exceeds budget), Pulumicost
returns a diagnostic error or warning, which Pulumi displays in the CLI.

Commit message:

chore(all): rebrand ecosystem to finfocus
- Renamed Go module from pulumicost-core to finfocus across all files
- Updated environment variable prefix from PULUMICOST to FINFOCUS
- Implemented a migration layer for legacy home config directory
- Restored Pulumicost backward compatibility for env vars and binaries
- Updated Docker images, Goreleaser, and CI/CD workflows for new name
- Performed comprehensive documentation rebranding in docs/ and README

- [x] Verified all imports correctly point to github.com/rshade/finfocus
- [x] Tested legacy compatibility layer for PULUMICOST variables
- [x] Confirmed binary builds as finfocus and pulumi-tool-finfocus
- [x] make lint passes with zero issues
- [x] make test passes (excluding AWS-dependent E2E)

- internal/migration/migrator.go - Logic for migrating config/state
- cmd/finfocus/root_test.go - Tests for branded CLI output

- go.mod - Renamed module path
- internal/config/config.go - Updated env prefix and added compat layer
- internal/registry/registry.go - Updated plugin discovery for legacy names
- README.md - Full rebranding and updated project links

- Renamed cmd/pulumicost directory to cmd/finfocus
- Updated agent configuration files (.claude, .gemini)

Closes #113

docs/architecture/analyzer.md, after:

---
title: Analyzer Architecture
description: Architecture of the FinFocus Analyzer integration
layout: default
---

FinFocus integrates with the Pulumi engine via the Analyzer interface.
This allows FinFocus to intercept resource changes during `pulumi preview`
and `pulumi up` to provide cost estimates and policy enforcement.

## Overview

The Analyzer runs as a gRPC service that Pulumi connects to. When you run
a Pulumi command, if the analyzer is configured, Pulumi sends resource
definitions to FinFocus.

## Protocol

FinFocus implements the `pulumirpc.Analyzer` service.

- **Analyze**: Receives a resource and its properties. FinFocus calculates
  the cost.
- **AnalyzeStack**: Receives the entire stack state.

## Configuration

The analyzer is configured via `Pulumi.yaml` using the `analyzers` key:

```yaml
analyzers:
  - name: finfocus
    version: v1.0.0
```

## Diagnostics

If a resource violates a cost policy (e.g., exceeds budget), FinFocus
returns a diagnostic error or warning, which Pulumi displays in the CLI.
