docs/getting-started/prerequisites.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Prerequisites
description: System requirements and dependencies for PulumiCost
---

## System Requirements

### Minimum

- OS: Linux, macOS, or Windows
- Memory: 256 MB RAM
- Disk: 50 MB free space
- Network: Internet connection (for plugins)

### Recommended

- OS: Latest Linux distribution or macOS 12+
- Memory: 1 GB RAM
- Disk: 500 MB free space

## Required Software

### Pulumi CLI

PulumiCost works with existing Pulumi projects.

```bash
# Check if installed
pulumi --version

# Install: https://www.pulumi.com/docs/install/
```

### Cloud Credentials

For projected costs, you don't need cloud credentials.

For actual costs (with plugins), you need:

- **AWS:** AWS access key or IAM role
- **Azure:** Azure credentials or service principal
- **GCP:** GCP service account

### Optional: Go 1.25.5+ (for building from source)

```bash
# Check if installed
go version

# Install: https://golang.org/doc/install
```

## Network Access

### Required Ports

- **Inbound:** None (CLI tool)
- **Outbound:**
  - HTTPS (443): For plugin communication
  - gRPC (default): For plugin protocols

### Firewall

If behind corporate firewall:

- Allow HTTPS outbound (443)
- Allow gRPC outbound (variable ports)
- Contact your IT team for exceptions

## Cloud Provider Access

### For Projected Costs

No credentials needed - works with Pulumi definitions.

### For Actual Costs

Requires plugin credentials:

**Vantage:**

- API key from https://vantage.sh
- Read-only access sufficient

**Kubecost (future):**

- Kubecost cluster access
- Metrics endpoint

## Verification Checklist

- [ ] Pulumi CLI installed (`pulumi --version`)
- [ ] Internet connection working
- [ ] Terminal/command line access
- [ ] Cloud credentials configured (if needed)

## Troubleshooting

**"pulumi command not found"**

- Install Pulumi: https://www.pulumi.com/docs/install/
- Add to PATH

**"Permission denied" on binary**

```bash
chmod +x pulumicost
```

**"No space left on device"**

- Free up disk space
- Install to different location

---

[Continue to Installation](installation.md)

Commit message:

chore(all): rebrand ecosystem to finfocus
- Renamed Go module from pulumicost-core to finfocus across all files
- Updated environment variable prefix from PULUMICOST to FINFOCUS
- Implemented a migration layer for legacy home config directory
- Restored Pulumicost backward compatibility for env vars and binaries
- Updated Docker images, Goreleaser, and CI/CD workflows for new name
- Performed comprehensive documentation rebranding in docs/ and README

- [x] Verified all imports correctly point to github.com/rshade/finfocus
- [x] Tested legacy compatibility layer for PULUMICOST variables
- [x] Confirmed binary builds as finfocus and pulumi-tool-finfocus
- [x] make lint passes with zero issues
- [x] make test passes (excluding AWS-dependent E2E)

- internal/migration/migrator.go - Logic for migrating config/state
- cmd/finfocus/root_test.go - Tests for branded CLI output

- go.mod - Renamed module path
- internal/config/config.go - Updated env prefix and added compat layer
- internal/registry/registry.go - Updated plugin discovery for legacy names
- README.md - Full rebranding and updated project links

- Renamed cmd/pulumicost directory to cmd/finfocus
- Updated agent configuration files (.claude, .gemini)

Closes #113

docs/getting-started/prerequisites.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Prerequisites
description: System requirements and dependencies for FinFocus
---

## System Requirements

### Minimum

- OS: Linux, macOS, or Windows
- Memory: 256 MB RAM
- Disk: 50 MB free space
- Network: Internet connection (for plugins)

### Recommended

- OS: Latest Linux distribution or macOS 12+
- Memory: 1 GB RAM
- Disk: 500 MB free space

## Required Software

### Pulumi CLI

FinFocus works with existing Pulumi projects.

```bash
# Check if installed
pulumi --version

# Install: https://www.pulumi.com/docs/install/
```

### Cloud Credentials

For projected costs, you don't need cloud credentials.

For actual costs (with plugins), you need:

- **AWS:** AWS access key or IAM role
- **Azure:** Azure credentials or service principal
- **GCP:** GCP service account

### Optional: Go 1.25.5+ (for building from source)

```bash
# Check if installed
go version

# Install: https://golang.org/doc/install
```

## Network Access

### Required Ports

- **Inbound:** None (CLI tool)
- **Outbound:**
  - HTTPS (443): For plugin communication
  - gRPC (default): For plugin protocols

### Firewall

If behind corporate firewall:

- Allow HTTPS outbound (443)
- Allow gRPC outbound (variable ports)
- Contact your IT team for exceptions

## Cloud Provider Access

### For Projected Costs

No credentials needed - works with Pulumi definitions.

### For Actual Costs

Requires plugin credentials:

**Vantage:**

- API key from https://vantage.sh
- Read-only access sufficient

**Kubecost (future):**

- Kubecost cluster access
- Metrics endpoint

## Verification Checklist

- [ ] Pulumi CLI installed (`pulumi --version`)
- [ ] Internet connection working
- [ ] Terminal/command line access
- [ ] Cloud credentials configured (if needed)

## Troubleshooting

**"pulumi command not found"**

- Install Pulumi: https://www.pulumi.com/docs/install/
- Add to PATH

**"Permission denied" on binary**

```bash
chmod +x finfocus
```

**"No space left on device"**

- Free up disk space
- Install to different location

---

[Continue to Installation](installation.md)
