docs/plugin-system.md, before:

# Plugin System Guide

Comprehensive guide to the PulumiCost plugin architecture, management, and development.

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Plugin Architecture](#plugin-architecture)
- [Plugin Management](#plugin-management)
- [Available Plugins](#available-plugins)
- [Plugin Development](#plugin-development)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Overview

PulumiCost Core uses a plugin-based architecture to fetch cost data from various
sources. Plugins are standalone binaries that implement the CostSource gRPC
service, allowing extensible integration with cloud providers and cost
management platforms.

### Key Benefits

- **Extensibility**: Support for new cost data sources without core changes
- **Modularity**: Independent plugin development and deployment
- **Flexibility**: Multiple cost data sources for validation and accuracy
- **Maintainability**: Plugin-specific logic separated from core functionality

## Plugin Architecture

### Communication Protocol

Plugins communicate with PulumiCost Core via gRPC using the
[pulumicost-spec](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-spec) protocol
definitions.

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[PulumiCost Core] -->|gRPC| B[Plugin Process]
    B -->|CostSource API| C[Cloud Provider]
    B -->|Response| A

    D[Plugin Registry] --> A
    E[Plugin Manifest] --> D
    F[Plugin Binary] --> B
```

### Plugin Lifecycle

1. **Discovery**: Registry scans `~/.pulumicost/plugins/` directory
2. **Launch**: Process launcher starts plugin binary
3. **Connection**: gRPC connection establishment
4. **Authentication**: Plugin authenticates with data source
5. **Query**: Cost data requests and responses
6. **Cleanup**: Process termination and resource cleanup

### Directory Structure

```text
~/.pulumicost/plugins/
├── kubecost/
│   └── 1.0.0/
│       ├── pulumicost-kubecost          # Plugin binary
│       └── plugin.manifest.json        # Optional manifest
├── aws-plugin/
│   └── 0.1.0/
│       ├── pulumicost-aws
│       └── plugin.manifest.json
└── custom-plugin/
    └── 0.2.0/
        └── pulumicost-custom
```

## Plugin Management

### List Available Plugins

```bash
# List all discovered plugins
pulumicost plugin list
```

**Sample Output:**

```text
NAME        VERSION  STATUS    SUPPORTS                    BINARY
kubecost    1.0.0    ready     projected,actual           pulumicost-kubecost
aws-plugin  0.1.0    ready     projected                  pulumicost-aws
azure-cost  0.2.0    error     -                          pulumicost-azure
```

### Validate Plugin Installation

```bash
# Validate all plugins
pulumicost plugin validate

# Validate specific plugin
pulumicost plugin validate --adapter kubecost
```

**Validation Checks:**

- Binary exists and is executable
- Plugin responds to gRPC health checks
- Required capabilities are supported
- Authentication configuration is valid

### Plugin Installation

#### Manual Installation

```bash
# Create plugin directory
mkdir -p ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/

# Download and install plugin binary
curl -L https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-kubecost/releases/latest/download/pulumicost-kubecost-linux-amd64 \
  -o ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/pulumicost-kubecost

# Make executable
chmod +x ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/pulumicost-kubecost

# Optional: Create manifest
cat > ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/plugin.manifest.json << EOF
{
  "name": "kubecost",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "binary": "pulumicost-kubecost",
  "supports": ["projected_cost", "actual_cost"],
  "description": "Kubecost integration for Kubernetes cost analysis"
}
EOF
```

#### Package Manager Installation (Future)

```bash
# Coming soon
pulumicost plugin install kubecost@1.0.0
pulumicost plugin install aws-plugin@latest
```

### Plugin Configuration

#### Environment Variables

Most plugins use environment variables for configuration:

```bash
# Kubecost plugin configuration
export KUBECOST_API_URL="http://kubecost.example.com:9090"
export KUBECOST_API_TOKEN="your-api-token"

# AWS plugin configuration
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="your-access-key"
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="your-secret-key"
export AWS_REGION="us-west-2"

# Azure plugin configuration
export AZURE_CLIENT_ID="your-client-id"
export AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET="your-client-secret"
export AZURE_TENANT_ID="your-tenant-id"
```

#### Configuration Files

Some plugins support configuration files:

```yaml
# ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/config.yaml
api_url: 'http://kubecost.example.com:9090'
api_token: 'your-api-token'
timeout: 30s
retry_attempts: 3
clusters:
  - name: 'production'
    context: 'prod-k8s'
  - name: 'staging'
    context: 'staging-k8s'
```

## Available Plugins

### Kubecost Plugin

**Repository**: [pulumicost-plugin-kubecost](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-kubecost)

**Capabilities:**

- Actual cost data from Kubecost API
- Kubernetes workload cost attribution
- Pod, namespace, and cluster-level costs
- Multi-cluster support

**Configuration:**

```bash
export KUBECOST_API_URL="http://kubecost.example.com:9090"
export KUBECOST_API_TOKEN="optional-api-token"
```

**Usage:**

```bash
pulumicost cost actual --pulumi-json plan.json --from 2025-01-01 --adapter kubecost
```

### AWS Pricing Plugin

**Repository**: [pulumicost-plugin-aws](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-aws) (planned)

**Capabilities:**

- AWS Cost Explorer integration
- EC2, RDS, S3 pricing data
- Reserved instance optimization
- Multi-account cost aggregation

**Configuration:**

```bash
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="your-access-key"
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="your-secret-key"
export AWS_REGION="us-west-2"
```

### Azure Cost Management Plugin

**Repository**: [pulumicost-plugin-azure](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-azure) (planned)

**Capabilities:**

- Azure Cost Management API integration
- Resource group cost breakdown
- Azure subscription analysis
- Reserved instance tracking

### GCP Cloud Billing Plugin

**Repository**: [pulumicost-plugin-gcp](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-gcp) (planned)

**Capabilities:**

- Google Cloud Billing API integration
- Project and folder cost attribution
- Committed use discount tracking
- BigQuery cost analysis

## Plugin Development

### Getting Started

#### Prerequisites

- **Go**: Version 1.25.5 or later
- **Protocol Buffers**: For gRPC service definitions
- **pulumicost-spec**: Protocol definitions repository

#### Project Setup

```bash
# Create new plugin project
mkdir pulumicost-plugin-mycloud
cd pulumicost-plugin-mycloud

# Initialize Go module
go mod init github.com/yourusername/pulumicost-plugin-mycloud

# Add pulumicost-spec dependency
go get github.com/rshade/pulumicost-spec/sdk/go@latest
```

### Implementation Guide

#### 1. Implement CostSource Interface

```go
package main

import (
    "context"
    "fmt"

    pb "github.com/rshade/pulumicost-spec/sdk/go/proto/pulumicost/v1"
    "google.golang.org/grpc"
)

type MyCloudPlugin struct {
    pb.UnimplementedCostSourceServiceServer
    client *MyCloudClient  // Your cloud provider client
}

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) Name(ctx context.Context, req *pb.NameRequest) (*pb.NameResponse, error) {
    return &pb.NameResponse{
        Name: "mycloud",
        Version: "1.0.0",
    }, nil
}

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) GetProjectedCost(ctx context.Context, req *pb.GetProjectedCostRequest) (*pb.GetProjectedCostResponse, error) {
    // Implement projected cost logic
    resources := req.GetResources()
    var costItems []*pb.CostItem

    for _, resource := range resources {
        cost, err := p.calculateProjectedCost(resource)
        if err != nil {
            continue // Skip resources we can't price
        }

        costItems = append(costItems, &pb.CostItem{
            ResourceId: resource.GetId(),
            ResourceType: resource.GetType(),
            MonthlyCost: cost.Monthly,
            HourlyCost: cost.Hourly,
            Currency: "USD",
            Notes: cost.Notes,
        })
    }

    return &pb.GetProjectedCostResponse{
        CostItems: costItems,
    }, nil
}

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) GetActualCost(ctx context.Context, req *pb.GetActualCostRequest) (*pb.GetActualCostResponse, error) {
    // Implement actual cost logic
    resources := req.GetResources()
    fromTime := req.GetFromTime().AsTime()
    toTime := req.GetToTime().AsTime()

    var costItems []*pb.CostItem

    for _, resource := range resources {
        cost, err := p.getActualCost(resource, fromTime, toTime)
        if err != nil {
            continue
        }

        costItems = append(costItems, &pb.CostItem{
            ResourceId: resource.GetId(),
            ResourceType: resource.GetType(),
            TotalCost: cost.Total,
            Currency: "USD",
            StartTime: req.GetFromTime(),
            EndTime: req.GetToTime(),
            DailyCosts: cost.Daily,
        })
    }

    return &pb.GetActualCostResponse{
        CostItems: costItems,
    }, nil
}
```

#### 2. Implement Main Function

```go
func main() {
    // Create gRPC server
    lis, err := net.Listen("tcp", ":0") // Random available port
    if err != nil {
        log.Fatalf("Failed to listen: %v", err)
    }

    // Print the port for PulumiCost Core to connect to
    addr := lis.Addr().(*net.TCPAddr)
    fmt.Printf("PLUGIN_PORT=%d\n", addr.Port)

    // Create and register plugin
    s := grpc.NewServer()
    plugin := &MyCloudPlugin{
        client: NewMyCloudClient(), // Initialize your API client
    }

    pb.RegisterCostSourceServiceServer(s, plugin)

    // Start serving
    log.Printf("Plugin serving on port %d", addr.Port)
    if err := s.Serve(lis); err != nil {
        log.Fatalf("Failed to serve: %v", err)
    }
}
```

#### 3. Resource Mapping

```go
func (p *MyCloudPlugin) calculateProjectedCost(resource *pb.ResourceDescriptor) (*Cost, error) {
    // Map Pulumi resource types to cloud provider services
    switch resource.GetType() {
    case "mycloud:compute/instance:Instance":
        return p.getComputeCost(resource)
    case "mycloud:storage/bucket:Bucket":
        return p.getStorageCost(resource)
    case "mycloud:database/cluster:Cluster":
        return p.getDatabaseCost(resource)
    default:
        return nil, fmt.Errorf("unsupported resource type: %s", resource.GetType())
    }
}

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) getComputeCost(resource *pb.ResourceDescriptor) (*Cost, error) {
    // Extract instance size from resource properties
    properties := resource.GetProperties()
    instanceSize := properties["instanceSize"]

    // Query pricing API
    pricing, err := p.client.GetInstancePricing(instanceSize)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }

    return &Cost{
        Hourly:  pricing.HourlyRate,
        Monthly: pricing.HourlyRate * 730, // 730 hours per month
        Notes:   fmt.Sprintf("%s on-demand pricing", instanceSize),
    }, nil
}
```

### Plugin Testing

#### Unit Testing

```go
func TestMyCloudPlugin(t *testing.T) {
    plugin := &MyCloudPlugin{
        client: &MockMyCloudClient{}, // Mock client for testing
    }

    req := &pb.GetProjectedCostRequest{
        Resources: []*pb.ResourceDescriptor{
            {
                Id:   "test-instance",
                Type: "mycloud:compute/instance:Instance",
                Properties: map[string]string{
                    "instanceSize": "medium",
                },
            },
        },
    }

    resp, err := plugin.GetProjectedCost(context.Background(), req)
    assert.NoError(t, err)
    assert.Len(t, resp.CostItems, 1)
    assert.Equal(t, "test-instance", resp.CostItems[0].ResourceId)
}
```

#### Integration Testing

```bash
# Build plugin
go build -o pulumicost-mycloud

# Test with PulumiCost Core
mkdir -p ~/.pulumicost/plugins/mycloud/1.0.0/
cp pulumicost-mycloud ~/.pulumicost/plugins/mycloud/1.0.0/

# Validate plugin
pulumicost plugin validate --adapter mycloud

# Test cost calculation
pulumicost cost projected --pulumi-json test-plan.json --adapter mycloud
```

### Building and Distribution

#### Cross-Platform Builds

```bash
# Build for multiple platforms
GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-linux-amd64
GOOS=darwin GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-darwin-amd64
GOOS=windows GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-windows-amd64.exe
```

#### GitHub Releases

```yaml
# .github/workflows/release.yml
name: Release
on:
  push:
    tags: ['v*']
jobs:
  release:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - uses: actions/setup-go@v5
        with:
          go-version: '1.25.5'

      - name: Build binaries
        run: |
          GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-linux-amd64
          GOOS=darwin GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-darwin-amd64
          GOOS=windows GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-windows-amd64.exe

      - name: Create release
        uses: softprops/action-gh-release@v2
        with:
          files: |
            pulumicost-mycloud-*
```

## Configuration

### Plugin Manifest

Optional `plugin.manifest.json` file provides metadata:

```json
{
  "name": "mycloud",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "MyCloud cost integration plugin",
  "binary": "pulumicost-mycloud",
  "supports": ["projected_cost", "actual_cost"],
  "author": "Your Name",
  "homepage": "https://github.com/yourusername/pulumicost-plugin-mycloud",
  "config": {
    "required_env": ["MYCLOUD_API_KEY"],
    "optional_env": ["MYCLOUD_REGION", "MYCLOUD_TIMEOUT"],
    "config_file": "config.yaml"
  }
}
```

### Authentication

#### Environment Variables (Recommended)

```bash
export MYCLOUD_API_KEY="your-api-key"
export MYCLOUD_API_SECRET="your-api-secret"
export MYCLOUD_REGION="us-west-2"
```

#### Configuration Files

```yaml
# ~/.pulumicost/plugins/mycloud/1.0.0/config.yaml
api:
  key: 'your-api-key'
  secret: 'your-api-secret'
  endpoint: 'https://api.mycloud.com'
  timeout: 30s

regions:
  - 'us-west-2'
  - 'us-east-1'

cache:
  enabled: true
  ttl: '1h'
```

#### Credential Providers

```go
// Support multiple credential sources
type CredentialProvider interface {
    GetCredentials(ctx context.Context) (*Credentials, error)
}

// Environment variable provider
type EnvCredentialProvider struct{}

func (p *EnvCredentialProvider) GetCredentials(ctx context.Context) (*Credentials, error) {
    return &Credentials{
        APIKey:    os.Getenv("MYCLOUD_API_KEY"),
        APISecret: os.Getenv("MYCLOUD_API_SECRET"),
        Region:    os.Getenv("MYCLOUD_REGION"),
    }, nil
}

// Configuration file provider
type FileCredentialProvider struct {
    ConfigPath string
}

func (p *FileCredentialProvider) GetCredentials(ctx context.Context) (*Credentials, error) {
    // Load from config file
    config, err := loadConfigFile(p.ConfigPath)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }

    return &Credentials{
        APIKey:    config.API.Key,
        APISecret: config.API.Secret,
        Region:    config.API.Region,
    }, nil
}
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Plugin Issues

#### Plugin Not Found

```bash
# Check plugin directory structure
ls -la ~/.pulumicost/plugins/

# Verify binary exists and is executable
ls -la ~/.pulumicost/plugins/*/*/pulumicost-*
chmod +x ~/.pulumicost/plugins/*/*/pulumicost-*
```

#### Connection Failures

```bash
# Test plugin directly
~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/pulumicost-kubecost

# Check network connectivity
curl -v http://kubecost.example.com:9090/api/v1/costDataModel

# Verify authentication
export KUBECOST_API_TOKEN="test-token"
pulumicost plugin validate --adapter kubecost
```

#### Authentication Issues

```bash
# Check environment variables
env | grep -E "(AWS|AZURE|GCP|KUBECOST)"

# Test API access
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $API_TOKEN" https://api.provider.com/test

# Review plugin logs
pulumicost --debug cost actual --adapter kubecost --from 2025-01-01
```

### Debug Mode

```bash
# Enable debug logging
pulumicost --debug plugin validate

# Plugin-specific debugging
export PLUGIN_DEBUG=1
export PLUGIN_LOG_LEVEL=debug
pulumicost cost actual --adapter kubecost --from 2025-01-01
```

### Plugin Development Debugging

```go
// Add logging to plugin
import "log"

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) GetProjectedCost(ctx context.Context, req *pb.GetProjectedCostRequest) (*pb.GetProjectedCostResponse, error) {
    log.Printf("GetProjectedCost called with %d resources", len(req.GetResources()))

    for _, resource := range req.GetResources() {
        log.Printf("Processing resource: %s (%s)", resource.GetId(), resource.GetType())
    }

    // ... implementation
}
```

## Related Documentation

- [User Guide](user-guide.md) - Using plugins for cost analysis
- [Cost Calculations](cost-calculations.md) - Understanding cost methodologies
- [Installation](installation.md) - Setting up plugins
- [Troubleshooting](troubleshooting.md) - Common issues and solutions

## Community Plugins

### Contributing a Plugin

1. Implement the CostSource interface
2. Add comprehensive tests
3. Create documentation
4. Submit to plugin registry (coming soon)

### Plugin Registry (Future)

```bash
# Search available plugins
pulumicost plugin search aws

# Install from registry
pulumicost plugin install kubecost@1.0.0

# Update plugins
pulumicost plugin update --all
```

Commit message:

feat(registry): auto-select latest plugin version
This feature implements logic to automatically select the latest version of
installed plugins when multiple versions are present. By leveraging Semantic
Versioning (SemVer), the registry now filters the plugin list to ensure only
the most up-to-date logic is used for cost analysis. This prevents duplicate
cost calculations and potential conflicts from multiple active versions of
the same plugin. Additionally, minor code cleanup was performed in the proto
adapter.

- [x] Unit tests added for `ListLatestPlugins` covering SemVer precedence
- [x] Verified graceful handling of invalid version strings
- [x] Confirmed `Open` method correctly loads only the latest plugin versions
- [x] `make lint` passes with zero issues
- [x] `make test` passes (including new registry tests)

- `specs/001-latest-plugin-version/*` - Full feature specification, plan, and documentation

- `internal/registry/registry.go` - Implemented `ListLatestPlugins` and updated `Open` to use it
- `internal/registry/registry_test.go` - Added comprehensive tests for version filtering logic
- `internal/proto/adapter.go` - Refactored AWS provider string literal to a constant
- `docs/plugin-system.md` - Updated documentation to describe automatic version selection
- `AGENTS.md`, `GEMINI.md` - Updated AI context files

- Added `docker/.dockerignore`
- Standardized AI context files

Closes #140

docs/plugin-system.md, after:

# Plugin System Guide

Comprehensive guide to the PulumiCost plugin architecture, management, and development.

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Plugin Architecture](#plugin-architecture)
- [Plugin Management](#plugin-management)
- [Available Plugins](#available-plugins)
- [Plugin Development](#plugin-development)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Overview

PulumiCost Core uses a plugin-based architecture to fetch cost data from various
sources. Plugins are standalone binaries that implement the CostSource gRPC
service, allowing extensible integration with cloud providers and cost
management platforms.

### Key Benefits

- **Extensibility**: Support for new cost data sources without core changes
- **Modularity**: Independent plugin development and deployment
- **Flexibility**: Multiple cost data sources for validation and accuracy
- **Maintainability**: Plugin-specific logic separated from core functionality

## Plugin Architecture

### Communication Protocol

Plugins communicate with PulumiCost Core via gRPC using the
[pulumicost-spec](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-spec) protocol
definitions.

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[PulumiCost Core] -->|gRPC| B[Plugin Process]
    B -->|CostSource API| C[Cloud Provider]
    B -->|Response| A

    D[Plugin Registry] --> A
    E[Plugin Manifest] --> D
    F[Plugin Binary] --> B
```

### Plugin Lifecycle

1. **Discovery**: Registry scans `~/.pulumicost/plugins/` directory and selects the latest version of each plugin (using Semantic Versioning).
2. **Launch**: Process launcher starts plugin binary
3. **Connection**: gRPC connection establishment
4. **Authentication**: Plugin authenticates with data source
5. **Query**: Cost data requests and responses
6. **Cleanup**: Process termination and resource cleanup

### Directory Structure

```text
~/.pulumicost/plugins/
├── kubecost/
│   └── 1.0.0/
│       ├── pulumicost-kubecost          # Plugin binary
│       └── plugin.manifest.json        # Optional manifest
├── aws-plugin/
│   └── 0.1.0/
│       ├── pulumicost-aws
│       └── plugin.manifest.json
└── custom-plugin/
    └── 0.2.0/
        └── pulumicost-custom
```

## Plugin Management

### Plugin Versioning

PulumiCost Core supports side-by-side installation of multiple plugin versions. When performing cost analysis or other operations, the system automatically selects the **latest version** of each installed plugin based on Semantic Versioning (SemVer) rules.

- **Pre-release versions** (e.g., `v1.0.0-alpha`) are ignored if a stable version (e.g., `v1.0.0`) is present.
- **Invalid versions** are skipped with a warning.
- **Corrupted directories** are skipped with a warning.

To use a specific older version, you must currently uninstall newer versions or use a custom plugin directory.

### List Available Plugins

```bash
# List all discovered plugins
pulumicost plugin list
```

**Sample Output:**

```text
NAME        VERSION  STATUS    SUPPORTS                    BINARY
kubecost    1.0.0    ready     projected,actual           pulumicost-kubecost
aws-plugin  0.1.0    ready     projected                  pulumicost-aws
azure-cost  0.2.0    error     -                          pulumicost-azure
```

### Validate Plugin Installation

```bash
# Validate all plugins
pulumicost plugin validate

# Validate specific plugin
pulumicost plugin validate --adapter kubecost
```

**Validation Checks:**

- Binary exists and is executable
- Plugin responds to gRPC health checks
- Required capabilities are supported
- Authentication configuration is valid

### Plugin Installation

#### Manual Installation

```bash
# Create plugin directory
mkdir -p ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/

# Download and install plugin binary
curl -L https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-kubecost/releases/latest/download/pulumicost-kubecost-linux-amd64 \
  -o ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/pulumicost-kubecost

# Make executable
chmod +x ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/pulumicost-kubecost

# Optional: Create manifest
cat > ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/plugin.manifest.json << EOF
{
  "name": "kubecost",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "binary": "pulumicost-kubecost",
  "supports": ["projected_cost", "actual_cost"],
  "description": "Kubecost integration for Kubernetes cost analysis"
}
EOF
```

#### Package Manager Installation (Future)

```bash
# Coming soon
pulumicost plugin install kubecost@1.0.0
pulumicost plugin install aws-plugin@latest
```

### Plugin Configuration

#### Environment Variables

Most plugins use environment variables for configuration:

```bash
# Kubecost plugin configuration
export KUBECOST_API_URL="http://kubecost.example.com:9090"
export KUBECOST_API_TOKEN="your-api-token"

# AWS plugin configuration
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="your-access-key"
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="your-secret-key"
export AWS_REGION="us-west-2"

# Azure plugin configuration
export AZURE_CLIENT_ID="your-client-id"
export AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET="your-client-secret"
export AZURE_TENANT_ID="your-tenant-id"
```

#### Configuration Files

Some plugins support configuration files:

```yaml
# ~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/config.yaml
api_url: 'http://kubecost.example.com:9090'
api_token: 'your-api-token'
timeout: 30s
retry_attempts: 3
clusters:
  - name: 'production'
    context: 'prod-k8s'
  - name: 'staging'
    context: 'staging-k8s'
```

## Available Plugins

### Kubecost Plugin

**Repository**: [pulumicost-plugin-kubecost](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-kubecost)

**Capabilities:**

- Actual cost data from Kubecost API
- Kubernetes workload cost attribution
- Pod, namespace, and cluster-level costs
- Multi-cluster support

**Configuration:**

```bash
export KUBECOST_API_URL="http://kubecost.example.com:9090"
export KUBECOST_API_TOKEN="optional-api-token"
```

**Usage:**

```bash
pulumicost cost actual --pulumi-json plan.json --from 2025-01-01 --adapter kubecost
```

### AWS Pricing Plugin

**Repository**: [pulumicost-plugin-aws](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-aws) (planned)

**Capabilities:**

- AWS Cost Explorer integration
- EC2, RDS, S3 pricing data
- Reserved instance optimization
- Multi-account cost aggregation

**Configuration:**

```bash
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="your-access-key"
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="your-secret-key"
export AWS_REGION="us-west-2"
```

### Azure Cost Management Plugin

**Repository**: [pulumicost-plugin-azure](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-azure) (planned)

**Capabilities:**

- Azure Cost Management API integration
- Resource group cost breakdown
- Azure subscription analysis
- Reserved instance tracking

### GCP Cloud Billing Plugin

**Repository**: [pulumicost-plugin-gcp](https://github.com/rshade/pulumicost-plugin-gcp) (planned)

**Capabilities:**

- Google Cloud Billing API integration
- Project and folder cost attribution
- Committed use discount tracking
- BigQuery cost analysis

## Plugin Development

### Getting Started

#### Prerequisites

- **Go**: Version 1.25.5 or later
- **Protocol Buffers**: For gRPC service definitions
- **pulumicost-spec**: Protocol definitions repository

#### Project Setup

```bash
# Create new plugin project
mkdir pulumicost-plugin-mycloud
cd pulumicost-plugin-mycloud

# Initialize Go module
go mod init github.com/yourusername/pulumicost-plugin-mycloud

# Add pulumicost-spec dependency
go get github.com/rshade/pulumicost-spec/sdk/go@latest
```

### Implementation Guide

#### 1. Implement CostSource Interface

```go
package main

import (
    "context"
    "fmt"

    pb "github.com/rshade/pulumicost-spec/sdk/go/proto/pulumicost/v1"
    "google.golang.org/grpc"
)

type MyCloudPlugin struct {
    pb.UnimplementedCostSourceServiceServer
    client *MyCloudClient  // Your cloud provider client
}

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) Name(ctx context.Context, req *pb.NameRequest) (*pb.NameResponse, error) {
    return &pb.NameResponse{
        Name: "mycloud",
        Version: "1.0.0",
    }, nil
}

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) GetProjectedCost(ctx context.Context, req *pb.GetProjectedCostRequest) (*pb.GetProjectedCostResponse, error) {
    // Implement projected cost logic
    resources := req.GetResources()
    var costItems []*pb.CostItem

    for _, resource := range resources {
        cost, err := p.calculateProjectedCost(resource)
        if err != nil {
            continue // Skip resources we can't price
        }

        costItems = append(costItems, &pb.CostItem{
            ResourceId: resource.GetId(),
            ResourceType: resource.GetType(),
            MonthlyCost: cost.Monthly,
            HourlyCost: cost.Hourly,
            Currency: "USD",
            Notes: cost.Notes,
        })
    }

    return &pb.GetProjectedCostResponse{
        CostItems: costItems,
    }, nil
}

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) GetActualCost(ctx context.Context, req *pb.GetActualCostRequest) (*pb.GetActualCostResponse, error) {
    // Implement actual cost logic
    resources := req.GetResources()
    fromTime := req.GetFromTime().AsTime()
    toTime := req.GetToTime().AsTime()

    var costItems []*pb.CostItem

    for _, resource := range resources {
        cost, err := p.getActualCost(resource, fromTime, toTime)
        if err != nil {
            continue
        }

        costItems = append(costItems, &pb.CostItem{
            ResourceId: resource.GetId(),
            ResourceType: resource.GetType(),
            TotalCost: cost.Total,
            Currency: "USD",
            StartTime: req.GetFromTime(),
            EndTime: req.GetToTime(),
            DailyCosts: cost.Daily,
        })
    }

    return &pb.GetActualCostResponse{
        CostItems: costItems,
    }, nil
}
```

#### 2. Implement Main Function

```go
func main() {
    // Create gRPC server
    lis, err := net.Listen("tcp", ":0") // Random available port
    if err != nil {
        log.Fatalf("Failed to listen: %v", err)
    }

    // Print the port for PulumiCost Core to connect to
    addr := lis.Addr().(*net.TCPAddr)
    fmt.Printf("PLUGIN_PORT=%d\n", addr.Port)

    // Create and register plugin
    s := grpc.NewServer()
    plugin := &MyCloudPlugin{
        client: NewMyCloudClient(), // Initialize your API client
    }

    pb.RegisterCostSourceServiceServer(s, plugin)

    // Start serving
    log.Printf("Plugin serving on port %d", addr.Port)
    if err := s.Serve(lis); err != nil {
        log.Fatalf("Failed to serve: %v", err)
    }
}
```

#### 3. Resource Mapping

```go
func (p *MyCloudPlugin) calculateProjectedCost(resource *pb.ResourceDescriptor) (*Cost, error) {
    // Map Pulumi resource types to cloud provider services
    switch resource.GetType() {
    case "mycloud:compute/instance:Instance":
        return p.getComputeCost(resource)
    case "mycloud:storage/bucket:Bucket":
        return p.getStorageCost(resource)
    case "mycloud:database/cluster:Cluster":
        return p.getDatabaseCost(resource)
    default:
        return nil, fmt.Errorf("unsupported resource type: %s", resource.GetType())
    }
}

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) getComputeCost(resource *pb.ResourceDescriptor) (*Cost, error) {
    // Extract instance size from resource properties
    properties := resource.GetProperties()
    instanceSize := properties["instanceSize"]

    // Query pricing API
    pricing, err := p.client.GetInstancePricing(instanceSize)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }

    return &Cost{
        Hourly:  pricing.HourlyRate,
        Monthly: pricing.HourlyRate * 730, // 730 hours per month
        Notes:   fmt.Sprintf("%s on-demand pricing", instanceSize),
    }, nil
}
```

### Plugin Testing

#### Unit Testing

```go
func TestMyCloudPlugin(t *testing.T) {
    plugin := &MyCloudPlugin{
        client: &MockMyCloudClient{}, // Mock client for testing
    }

    req := &pb.GetProjectedCostRequest{
        Resources: []*pb.ResourceDescriptor{
            {
                Id:   "test-instance",
                Type: "mycloud:compute/instance:Instance",
                Properties: map[string]string{
                    "instanceSize": "medium",
                },
            },
        },
    }

    resp, err := plugin.GetProjectedCost(context.Background(), req)
    assert.NoError(t, err)
    assert.Len(t, resp.CostItems, 1)
    assert.Equal(t, "test-instance", resp.CostItems[0].ResourceId)
}
```

#### Integration Testing

```bash
# Build plugin
go build -o pulumicost-mycloud

# Test with PulumiCost Core
mkdir -p ~/.pulumicost/plugins/mycloud/1.0.0/
cp pulumicost-mycloud ~/.pulumicost/plugins/mycloud/1.0.0/

# Validate plugin
pulumicost plugin validate --adapter mycloud

# Test cost calculation
pulumicost cost projected --pulumi-json test-plan.json --adapter mycloud
```

### Building and Distribution

#### Cross-Platform Builds

```bash
# Build for multiple platforms
GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-linux-amd64
GOOS=darwin GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-darwin-amd64
GOOS=windows GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-windows-amd64.exe
```

#### GitHub Releases

```yaml
# .github/workflows/release.yml
name: Release
on:
  push:
    tags: ['v*']
jobs:
  release:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - uses: actions/setup-go@v5
        with:
          go-version: '1.25.5'

      - name: Build binaries
        run: |
          GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-linux-amd64
          GOOS=darwin GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-darwin-amd64
          GOOS=windows GOARCH=amd64 go build -o pulumicost-mycloud-windows-amd64.exe

      - name: Create release
        uses: softprops/action-gh-release@v2
        with:
          files: |
            pulumicost-mycloud-*
```

## Configuration

### Plugin Manifest

Optional `plugin.manifest.json` file provides metadata:

```json
{
  "name": "mycloud",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "MyCloud cost integration plugin",
  "binary": "pulumicost-mycloud",
  "supports": ["projected_cost", "actual_cost"],
  "author": "Your Name",
  "homepage": "https://github.com/yourusername/pulumicost-plugin-mycloud",
  "config": {
    "required_env": ["MYCLOUD_API_KEY"],
    "optional_env": ["MYCLOUD_REGION", "MYCLOUD_TIMEOUT"],
    "config_file": "config.yaml"
  }
}
```

### Authentication

#### Environment Variables (Recommended)

```bash
export MYCLOUD_API_KEY="your-api-key"
export MYCLOUD_API_SECRET="your-api-secret"
export MYCLOUD_REGION="us-west-2"
```

#### Configuration Files

```yaml
# ~/.pulumicost/plugins/mycloud/1.0.0/config.yaml
api:
  key: 'your-api-key'
  secret: 'your-api-secret'
  endpoint: 'https://api.mycloud.com'
  timeout: 30s

regions:
  - 'us-west-2'
  - 'us-east-1'

cache:
  enabled: true
  ttl: '1h'
```

#### Credential Providers

```go
// Support multiple credential sources
type CredentialProvider interface {
    GetCredentials(ctx context.Context) (*Credentials, error)
}

// Environment variable provider
type EnvCredentialProvider struct{}

func (p *EnvCredentialProvider) GetCredentials(ctx context.Context) (*Credentials, error) {
    return &Credentials{
        APIKey:    os.Getenv("MYCLOUD_API_KEY"),
        APISecret: os.Getenv("MYCLOUD_API_SECRET"),
        Region:    os.Getenv("MYCLOUD_REGION"),
    }, nil
}

// Configuration file provider
type FileCredentialProvider struct {
    ConfigPath string
}

func (p *FileCredentialProvider) GetCredentials(ctx context.Context) (*Credentials, error) {
    // Load from config file
    config, err := loadConfigFile(p.ConfigPath)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }

    return &Credentials{
        APIKey:    config.API.Key,
        APISecret: config.API.Secret,
        Region:    config.API.Region,
    }, nil
}
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Plugin Issues

#### Plugin Not Found

```bash
# Check plugin directory structure
ls -la ~/.pulumicost/plugins/

# Verify binary exists and is executable
ls -la ~/.pulumicost/plugins/*/*/pulumicost-*
chmod +x ~/.pulumicost/plugins/*/*/pulumicost-*
```

#### Connection Failures

```bash
# Test plugin directly
~/.pulumicost/plugins/kubecost/1.0.0/pulumicost-kubecost

# Check network connectivity
curl -v http://kubecost.example.com:9090/api/v1/costDataModel

# Verify authentication
export KUBECOST_API_TOKEN="test-token"
pulumicost plugin validate --adapter kubecost
```

#### Authentication Issues

```bash
# Check environment variables
env | grep -E "(AWS|AZURE|GCP|KUBECOST)"

# Test API access
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $API_TOKEN" https://api.provider.com/test

# Review plugin logs
pulumicost --debug cost actual --adapter kubecost --from 2025-01-01
```

### Debug Mode

```bash
# Enable debug logging
pulumicost --debug plugin validate

# Plugin-specific debugging
export PLUGIN_DEBUG=1
export PLUGIN_LOG_LEVEL=debug
pulumicost cost actual --adapter kubecost --from 2025-01-01
```

### Plugin Development Debugging

```go
// Add logging to plugin
import "log"

func (p *MyCloudPlugin) GetProjectedCost(ctx context.Context, req *pb.GetProjectedCostRequest) (*pb.GetProjectedCostResponse, error) {
    log.Printf("GetProjectedCost called with %d resources", len(req.GetResources()))

    for _, resource := range req.GetResources() {
        log.Printf("Processing resource: %s (%s)", resource.GetId(), resource.GetType())
    }

    // ... implementation
}
```

## Related Documentation

- [User Guide](user-guide.md) - Using plugins for cost analysis
- [Cost Calculations](cost-calculations.md) - Understanding cost methodologies
- [Installation](installation.md) - Setting up plugins
- [Troubleshooting](troubleshooting.md) - Common issues and solutions

## Community Plugins

### Contributing a Plugin

1. Implement the CostSource interface
2. Add comprehensive tests
3. Create documentation
4. Submit to plugin registry (coming soon)

### Plugin Registry (Future)

```bash
# Search available plugins
pulumicost plugin search aws

# Install from registry
pulumicost plugin install kubecost@1.0.0

# Update plugins
pulumicost plugin update --all
```
